_pages/life-cycle.md, before:

---
title: Life cycle
---
A grouplet may spin up or down depending on an organization's need to address
issues and/or develop capabilities. This is a high-level description of how
grouplets are formed, how they operate, and how they may be paused, dissolved,
and reactivated.

* Table of contents
{: toc}

### Formation

Grouplets may initially be conceived by an ad hoc group of volunteers who take
initiative, or by appointment by managers or executives that recognize the need
to build a strong community around a specific topic.

While a grouplet should consist mainly of self-selecting volunteers, some
grouplets that are formed in response to urgent issues or to comply with legal
requirements may require that teams appoint an official liaison to join the
grouplet. In return for being held accountable for helping the organization
achieve business objectives, such mandated grouplets should receive direct
management and executive support, at least in the form of widespread volunteer
recruiting and recognition.

### Conventions

[conventions]: #conventions

Within an organization, there may be conventions or processes to guide the
formation of grouplets and to facilitate their discovery. For example:

- Inquiry in specific forums such as an [Intergrouplet][] or a dedicated
  [Slack][] channel to consider the need for a new grouplet—and its viability
- Drafting [two-pager][], or a charter in some other format
- Establishing goals, possibly in a standard format such as [Objectives and Key
  Results][OKRs]
- A [home page][] and/or a practices guide in a standard location, such as in a
  wiki or on a [Guides][] site
- A [Slack][] channel with a standard prefix or suffix, such as `g-` or
  `-grouplet`
- Registering metadata in a database, such as the names of leaders, the URL of
  the home page and other artifacts, etc.
- Participating in an [Intergrouplet][]

[Guides]: https://github.com/mbland/guides-template
[Slack]:  https://slack.com

### Execution

Once the grouplet has established its presence via adhering to the appropriate
formation [conventions][], it can begin to execute on its mission. The
[Processes and artifacts][] and [Education and advocacy][] chapters provide some
high-level guidelines to shape the grouplet's vision and activities. These
chapters should be considered starting points for further exploration, not all
encompassing, iron clad rules.

### Pausing and dissolving

[pausing]: #pausing-and-dissolving

If a grouplet appears to be inactive—whether due to lost momentum or achieving
the mission—it may choose to either pause its activities or dissolve completely.
Given sound [conventions][] for formation and discovery, pausing and dissolving
may consist of announcing the intention to do so in the appropriate forums, and
then doing any follow-up work necessary to preserve historical information and
artifacts.

### Reactivating

If interest in a grouplet resurges in the future, the artifacts it produced
previously—preserved as institutional knowledge via the aforementioned
[conventions][]—may prove invaluable to reactivating it successfully. The
history of who came before and what they attempted and achieved can provide
insight into how best to pick up where the previous incarnation left off, rather
than starting from scratch and risk repeating mistakes.

[two-pager]: {{site.baseurl}}{% link _pages/processes-and-artifacts.md %}#the-two-pager
[home page]: {{site.baseurl}}{% link _pages/processes-and-artifacts.md %}#home-page
[OKRs]:      {{site.baseurl}}{% link _pages/processes-and-artifacts.md %}#objectives-and-key-results
[Intergrouplet]: {{site.baseurl}}{% link _pages/intergrouplets.md %}
[Processes and artifacts]: {{site.baseurl}}{% link _pages/processes-and-artifacts.md %}
[Education and advocacy]:  {{site.baseurl}}{% link _pages/education-and-advocacy.md %}

Commit message:

Add "Structure" chapter, move Roles into it
Also imports the "commit model" from "The Rainbow of Death".

_pages/life-cycle.md, after:

---
title: Life cycle
---
A grouplet may spin up or down depending on an organization's need to address
issues and/or develop capabilities. This is a high-level description of how
grouplets are formed, how they operate, and how they may be paused, dissolved,
and reactivated.

* Table of contents
{: toc}

### Formation

Grouplets may initially be conceived by an ad hoc group of volunteers who take
initiative, or by appointment by managers or executives that recognize the need
to build a strong community around a specific topic.

While a grouplet should consist mainly of self-selecting volunteers, some
grouplets that are formed in response to urgent issues or to comply with legal
requirements may require that teams appoint an official liaison to join the
grouplet. In return for being held accountable for helping the organization
achieve business objectives, such mandated grouplets should receive direct
management and executive support, at least in the form of widespread volunteer
recruiting and recognition.

### Conventions

[conventions]: #conventions

Within an organization, there may be conventions or processes to guide the
formation of grouplets and to facilitate their discovery. For example:

- Inquiry in specific forums such as an [Intergrouplet][] or a dedicated
  [Slack][] channel to consider the need for a new grouplet—and its viability
- Drafting [two-pager][], or a charter in some other format
- Establishing goals, possibly in a standard format such as [Objectives and Key
  Results][OKRs]
- A [home page][] and/or a practices guide in a standard location, such as in a
  wiki or on a [Guides][] site
- A [Slack][] channel with a standard prefix or suffix, such as `g-` or
  `-grouplet`
- Registering metadata in a database, such as the names of leaders, the URL of
  the home page and other artifacts, etc.
- Participating in an [Intergrouplet][]

[Guides]: https://github.com/mbland/guides-template
[Slack]:  https://slack.com

### Execution

Once the grouplet has established its presence via adhering to the appropriate
formation [conventions][], it can begin to execute on its mission. The
[Structure][] chapter suggests a method of lightweight organization that can
help orient volunteers and scale the effort very quickly. The [Processes and
artifacts][] and [Education and advocacy][] chapters suggest some high-level
tools and guidelines to shape the grouplet's vision and activities.

These chapters should be considered starting points for further exploration, not
all encompassing, iron clad rules.

### Pausing and dissolving

[pausing]: #pausing-and-dissolving

If a grouplet appears to be inactive—whether due to lost momentum or achieving
the mission—it may choose to either pause its activities or dissolve completely.
Given sound [conventions][] for formation and discovery, pausing and dissolving
may consist of announcing the intention to do so in the appropriate forums, and
then doing any follow-up work necessary to preserve historical information and
artifacts.

### Reactivating

If interest in a grouplet resurges in the future, the artifacts it produced
previously—preserved as institutional knowledge via the aforementioned
[conventions][]—may prove invaluable to reactivating it successfully. The
history of who came before and what they attempted and achieved can provide
insight into how best to pick up where the previous incarnation left off, rather
than starting from scratch and risk repeating mistakes.

[two-pager]: {{site.baseurl}}{% link _pages/processes-and-artifacts.md %}#the-two-pager
[home page]: {{site.baseurl}}{% link _pages/processes-and-artifacts.md %}#home-page
[OKRs]:      {{site.baseurl}}{% link _pages/processes-and-artifacts.md %}#objectives-and-key-results
[Intergrouplet]: {{site.baseurl}}{% link _pages/intergrouplets.md %}
[Structure]:     {{site.baseurl}}{% link _pages/structure.md %}
[Processes and artifacts]: {{site.baseurl}}{% link _pages/processes-and-artifacts.md %}
[Education and advocacy]:  {{site.baseurl}}{% link _pages/education-and-advocacy.md %}
