---
title: Origin story
---
The structure and function of grouplets is nothing new: It's just an
organization within an organization aimed at improving some aspect of the
organization's function. Like [The Hero with a Thousand Faces][Campbell], there
are many other names for essentially the same thing, such as "working groups,"
"guilds," and "communities of practice."

[Campbell]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Hero_with_a_Thousand_Faces

The term "grouplet" appeared to originate at Google. When Craig Silverstein,
Google's first employee, began to notice that the company was growing so large
that communication between programmers was beginning to break down, he formed an
ad hoc group called "the Grouplet" as a community to foster informal knowledge
transfer.

As the company grew even further, it became apparent that one Grouplet
wasn't enough. In typical Google fashion, Craig sharded the Grouplet into what
became the "official" family of grouplets, also known as "intergroups" or
"intergrouplets": Testing, Fixit, Readability (for coding standards),
Documentation, Mentoring, and Hiring. In order to foster coordination and
collaboration between the grouplets, and to advance the cause of groupleteering
across the company, he established the Intergroup, a grouplet whose members were
the leaders of all the other grouplets.

[Mike Bland][], the original primary author of this Guide, joined Google and the
Testing Grouplet in 2005. He became one of the leads of the Testing Grouplet
(and, thus, a member of the Intergroup) in 2006, and then switched to become the
lead of the Fixit Grouplet in 2007. In collaboration with many, many others,
including Mamie Rheingold, Ana Ulin, David Plass, Bharat Mediratta, and Nick
Lesiecki, Mike and the Testing and Fixit Grouplets drove a successful five-year
mission to make automated testing an indispensible component of the Google
development culture. His talk [The Rainbow of Death][] tells this story in
detail.

[Mike Bland]:           https://mike-bland.com/
[The Rainbow of Death]: https://mike-bland.com/the-rainbow-of-death

This guide aims to help others recreate that spirit of teamwork and that level
of impact across organizations everywhere.
